---
layout: post
title: "Abbott Solutions Test"
categories: misc
---

# The Real Numbers

## Cardinality

**Exercise 1.5.11 (Schröder--Bernstein Theorem).** Assume there exists a
1--1 function $f : X \to Y$ and another 1--1 function $g : Y \to X$.
Follow the steps to show that there exists a 1--1, onto function
$h : X \to Y$ and hence $X \sim Y$.

The strategy is to partition X and Y into components

::: center
$X = A \cup A'$ and $Y = B \cup B'$
:::

with $A \cap A' = \emptyset$ and $B \cap B' = \emptyset$, in such a way
that $f$ maps $A$ onto $B$, and g maps $B'$ onto $A'$.

1.  Explain how achieving this would lead to a proof that $X \sim Y$.

    *Solution.* We could then construct $h$ like so: $$h(x) =
                    \begin{cases}
                        f(x)      & \text{if $x \in A$} \\
                        g^{-1}(x) & \text{if $x \in A'$}
                    \end{cases}$$ where $g^{-1}(x) = y$ when $g(y) = x$
    (there is a unique such $y$). Notice that $g^{-1}$ is both 1-1 and
    onto $B'$, making $h$ a 1-1 function mapping onto $Y$ as desired.

2.  Set $A_1 = X \setminus g(Y) = \{x \in X : x \notin g(Y)\}$ (what
    happens if $A_1 = \emptyset$?) and inductively define a sequence of
    sets by letting $A_{n+1} = g(f(A_n))$. Show that
    $\{A_n : n \in \mathbf{N}\}$ is a pairwise disjoint collection of
    subsets of $X$, while $\{f(A_n) : n \in \mathbf{N}\}$ is a similar
    collection in $Y$.

    *Solution.* Note that if $A_1 = \emptyset$, then $g$ is onto, so we
    would be done. So let's assume $A_1 \neq \emptyset$. First, for all
    $n > 1$, $A_n \subset g(Y)$, so it must be that $A_1$ is disjoint
    from all such $A_n$. We now need to show that any arbitrary $A_n$
    and $A_m$ are disjoint. To do so, we will show that if they shared
    an element, then $A_1$ would have to share some element with some
    $A_k$, contradicting what we have just established.

    Suppose $x \in A_n \cup A_m$. Since $x$ is included in the
    construction of both of these, there must be some $x_1 \in A_{n-1}$
    and $x_2 \in A_{m-1}$ that satisfy $g(f(x_1)) = g(f(x_2)) = x$. The
    composition $g \circ f$ is 1-1 so it must be that $x_1 = x_2$ and
    thus $A_{n-1}$ and $A_{m-1}$ share an element. By induction,
    $A_{n-2}$ and $A_{m-2}$ must also share an element, and so on. WLOG
    let $n > m$, then the induction proves that $A_1$ and $A_{n-m+1}$
    share an element, a contradiction.

    It follows that all $f(A_n)$ must also be disjoint as a consequence
    of $f$ being 1-1.

3.  Let $A = \bigcup_{n=1}^{\infty} A_n$ and
    $B = \bigcup_{n=1}^{\infty} f(A_n)$. Show that $f$ maps $A$ onto
    $B$.

    *Solution.* Consider $b \in B$. There is some $n$ (indeed, a unique
    $n$) for which $b \in f(A_n)$ and thus some $a \in A_n$ satisfies
    $f(a) = b$. So $g$ maps $A$ onto $B$.

4.  Let $A' = X \setminus A$ and $B' = Y \setminus B$. Show $g$ maps
    $B'$ onto $A'$.

    *Solution.* Consider $a \in A'$. This means that $a \notin A_1$ and
    thus $a \in g(Y)$ so there is some $b$ for which $g(b) = a$. Now
    suppose it was the case that $b \in B$ and thus $b \in f(A_n)$ for
    some $n$. Then $g(b) = a \in A_{n+1}$ contradicting the fact that
    $a \in A'$. So it must be that $b \in B'$ and so $g$ maps $B'$ onto
    $A'$, and the proof of the theorem is complete.

## Cantor's Theorem

**Exercise 1.6.10(c).** Given a set $B$, a subset $\mathcal{A}$ of
$P(B)$ is called an *antichain* if no element of $\mathcal{A}$ is a
subset of any other element. Does $P(\mathbf{N})$ contain an uncountable
antichain?

*Solution.* There is an uncountable antichain, and we can directly
construct it. Take the infinite binary tree and label its vertices as
follows: label the root with 1, its children with 2 and 3, their
children with 4 through 7, and so on. Then we generate a subset of
$\mathbf{N}$ by following a path from the root of the tree down
infinitely, and taking the numbers labelled on the vertices into the
subset. The subsets generated by each possible path will make up
$\mathcal{A}$. There are uncountably infinitely many since each path
corresponds to an infinite sequence of 0's and 1's. Consider arbitrary
elements $X$ and $Y$ of $\mathcal{A}$. At some level $k$, the paths that
generated them diverged. The labels of the vertices on the $k+1$-th
level that were included in $X$ and $Y$ are distinct. Thus neither is a
subset of the other and $\mathcal{A}$ constitutes an uncountable
antichain.

Here's a related exercise to consider: prove that any antichain in
$P(\mathbf{N})$ in which every two elements are pairwise disjoint must
be countable. Notice the antichain described above does not fit this
condition.
